---
layout: post
title: RSA
date: 2026-06-02
permalink: /posts/rsa/
---
# RSA:
## Quick info:
- Acronym: Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (creators’ last names)
- Created: 1977
- Type: Asymmetric
- Typical key size: 2048 bits
- Considered secure: Yes

## Procedure - Making Keys:
Take two different big prime numbers, and call them **p** and **q**. 
Find their product and call that number **N**, so that **p x q = N**.
p and q are kept secret. 
N will be a semi-prime number, because its only factors will be the prime numbers p and q. 

Find T, the [totient](https://vodomerka-rgb.github.io/ctfs-for-dummies/posts/totients/) of N. Because it is a semiprime number, the totient of N will be $$T = (p-1)(q-1)$$. 

Next, choose a **public** key, e. 
In order for RSA to work, e has to be coprime to  T and less than T.

This step is related to the creation of a **private key**, D. The product of D and E divided by T must have a remainder of 1. Or, in other words, $$(D\cdot E)\bmod T=1$$. Oftentimes, this is also written as $$1\equiv (D\cdot E)\pmod{T}$$ where the three lines are basically just a fancy equal sign.

## Encryption and Decryption:
We have a plaintext that we converted to a number which we can call *m*, through character encoding and then Base-256 conversion. To encrypt, we take that number m, raise it to the power of e, and find the remainder after dividing with N. In math notation, this looks like $$m^e\bmod N = c$$ where c is the ciphertext. 
This is really just $$m^e\bmod (p \cdot q)$$ with those two prime numbers from the beginning. 

Now you’ll notice that T isn’t actually part of the equation, but it was still necessary to calculate it to find a $$e$$ and $$d$$ that would work. 

To decrypt then, we do the opposite, $$c^D \bmod N = m$$. 

## Security Limitations and Known Vulnerabilities:
### Weiner’s Attack
This occurs when the private key $$d$$ is too small, specifically less than $$\frac{1}{3}N^{\frac{1}{4}}$$. 

### Boneh-Durfee Attack
Similar to Weiner’s Attack. It is possible when d is less than $$N^{0.292}$$. 

### Fermat’s Factorization 
Occurs when the two prime factors p and q are too close to each other. With the theorem, it is possible to find the two factors and subsequently calculate T and make it much easier to guess the keys.
### Coppersmith’s Attack
If an attacker knows part of a message or a factor, they use something called lattice reduction (LLL algorithm) to guess the rest. 

### ROCA (Return of Coppersmith's Attack)
Because generated primes are often not truly random, attackers could use Coppersmith's attack to reverse-engineer the private key from the public key.
### Bleichenbacher’s Attack
A padding oracle attack. An attacker tweaks a ciphertext and passes it to a server, logging its responses. By doing this lots of times, the attacker exploits the server's formatting complaints to decrypt the message.

### Håstad’s Broadcast Attack
If you send the exact same message to exponent $$e$$ or more people, an eavesdropper can intercept and stitch messages together with the Chinese Remainder Theorem and crack the encryption..

### Common Modulus Attack
Different users share the same modulus N but have different exponents. If the same message is sent to two of these users, an attacker can combine the public exponents to isolate the plaintext without needing to factor N. 
